In the last years of the nineteenth century, Planck was investigating the problem of black-body radiation first posed by Kirchhoff some forty
years earlier. It is well known that hot objects glow, and that hotter objects glow brighter than cooler ones. The reason is that the
electromagnetic field obeys laws of motion just like a mass on a spring, and can come to thermal equilibrium with hot atoms. When a hot object
is in equilibrium with light, the amount of light it absorbs is equal to the amount of light it emits. If the object is black, meaning it
absorbs all the light that hits it, then it emits the maximum amount of thermal light too.
The assumption that blackbody radiation is thermal leads to an accurate prediction: the total amount of emitted energy goes up with the
temperature according to a definite rule, the Stefan–Boltzmann law (1879–84). But it was also known that the colour of the light given off by
a hot object changes with the temperature, so that "white hot" is hotter than "red hot". Nevertheless, Wilhelm Wien discovered the
mathematical relationship between the peaks of the curves at different temperatures, by using the principle of adiabatic invariance. At each
different temperature, the curve is moved over by Wien's displacement law (1893). Wien also proposed an approximation for the spectrum of the
object, which was correct at high frequencies (short wavelength) but not at low frequencies (long wavelength).[5] It still was not clear why
the spectrum of a hot object had the form that it has (see diagram).
Planck hypothesized that the equations of motion for light describe a set of harmonic oscillators, one for each possible frequency. He
examined how the entropy of the oscillators varied with the temperature of the body, trying to match Wien's law, and was able to derive an
approximate mathematical function for black-body spectrum.[6]
However, Planck soon realized that his solution was not unique. There were several different solutions, each of which gave a different value
for the entropy of the oscillators.[6] To save his theory, Planck had to resort to using the then controversial theory of statistical
mechanics,[6] which he described as "an act of despair … I was ready to sacrifice any of my previous convictions about physics."[7] One of his
new boundary conditions was
    to interpret UN [the vibrational energy of N oscillators] not as a continuous, infinitely divisible quantity, but as a discrete quantity
composed of an integral number of finite equal parts. Let us call each such part the energy element ε;
    —Planck, On the Law of Distribution of Energy in the Normal Spectrum[6]
With this new condition, Planck had imposed the quantization of the energy of the oscillators, "a purely formal assumption actually I did
not think much about it..." in his own words,[8] but one which would revolutionize physics. Applying this new approach to Wien's displacement
law showed that the "energy element" must be proportional to the frequency of the oscillator, the first version of what is now sometimestermed
the "Planck–Einstein relation":
